RFC-013: new initiative process (#30)
thegooddocsproject/request-for-comment: Accepted-RFCs/RFC-013-new-initiative-process.md

# RFC-013: New initiative process

## Proposed by

Ryan Macklin ([@macklin](https://thegooddocs.slack.com/team/U01DYRWG43X))

Initially submitted on 24 Aug 2022

## Current status

- [x] Draft
- [ ] Under discussion
- [ ] Final comment and voting (until YYYY-MM-DD) {{Add date after selecting this status.}}
- [ ] Accepted
- [ ] Rejected
- [ ] Implemented
- [ ] Deferred
- [ ] Withdrawn

## Proposal overview

The Good Docs Project has an issue of delivery: we haven't delivered a 1.0 of our templates since the inception. And as a volunteer org, we need to keep focus on our mission and goal. It's easy to dilute ourselves if we don't keep ourselves accountable to focus and intentional communal growth.

> 

Reviewer: This is not directly related to the overall content of the RFC, so please treat this is a non-blocking side comment. I wanted to say that I don't agree with the narrative/framing here and so I want to push back a little. This paragraph makes it sound like we haven't accomplished anything noteworthy in our community and I find myself bristling a bit at that statement. While it is true that we haven't delivered a 1.0 release, we are quite close to achieving it.

I also want to state that we have many significant accomplishments that shouldn't be lightly overlooked. Since the project began in 2019, we've been laying important groundwork to attract high quality community members to TGDP because we've been building a healthy, vibrant, fun community that delivers very real tangible benefits to people who participate over the long term in both intrinsic and extrinsic terms. Because of our strong mentorship program, we're training the next generation of tech workers and have at least 5+ success stories of people who have gotten jobs or entered the field of tech because of their direct involvement in the project. We're also promoting thought leadership within the documentation field in general. I'm proud of the community we've built and I think that is still a significant achievement. Healthy and happy open source communities are hard to build and maintain, but that's exactly what we've done here.

To me, TGDP feels like the equivalent of a startup that has taken time to set up the business infrastructure and attract a high quality workforce. We've moved past the bootstrapping phase where we operate out of someone's garage into a fairly serious project. The difference is just that time passes more slowly in open source than it does in the business world and we have to module our expectations for how fast things get done with a volunteer community. 

I also think we have been productive, it's just not immediately visible what has been achieved. For the past two years, we've been laying the groundwork for how we will work, building out our tech stack, procedures, and communication channels so that we can ensure easier onboarding, good community support and feedback, and high quality products. I think we are only just now beginning to see the benefits of that foundational groundwork we've been building. If I may be so bold, I think we're 75% on target to having what would meet my definition of a 1.0 release and that is no small accomplishment.

At the end of the day, we've done great things and soon we will have something tangible to show for it. We're so, so close. Let's both celebrate what we've accomplished in the past while also setting our sights on the next milestone.

Reviewer 2: *stealing this for a future blog post about the project `ninja`

Author: That's all pretty fair! I'll reframe the RFC with those thoughts in mind, and make sure we are being celebratory.

Author: And while I still agree with my "issue of delivery" sentiment, I also recognize (and should be explicitly saying) that we are working to deliver. We aren't just sitting around talking about a thing we'd like to do—we're doing the work. Just gotta make sure we keep doing the right work at the right time.

Timing is 
.
.
.
.
.
everything

Reviewer 3: Adding to @barbaricyawps 's list of achievements. We actually have a number of templates which are at 1.0 quality, or about to be released at 1.0 quality. (We just don't have a full set yet.)

Author: Revised this section!

> In other words, we as a project need to make sure we can at least do our core mission well. All new initiatives should 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other words, we as a project need to make sure we can at least do our core mission well. All new initiatives should 
```
should what?! Aargh, don't keep me in suspense!

Author: All new initiatives should finish their sentences! (Issue noted, I'll see if I can remember precisely my train of thought. Is what I got for drafting 4 RFCs at once)

Author: I believe it's "All new initiatives should support the organization's core goal/mission."
At least until we're at a point where our mission's execution isn't in its infancy anymore.

(As a personal note, the drafter of this RFC has ADHD, so "new project energy" is a real thing, a true risk of distraction and effort dilution.)

## Motivation

> As we grow, our risk of project scope creep and sprawl grows. As a group, we should grow *with intentionality*. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As we grow, our risk of project scope creep and sprawl grows. As a group, we should grow *with intention*. 
```

Reviewer 4: Small nitpick up here. As a non-native speaker, I don't know if there is a difference between intention and intentionality.

Author: "Intentionality" is a wordier way of saying "intent," which isn't exactly the same as "intention" (but there's nuance, they're 99% the same and could be used this way as well, which is also the case with "intentionality"). I'll change the instances to "intent."

## Proposal

> When someone wants to start a new working group or sub-project in the Good Docs Project, it should coherently address at least one of:

Reviewer 4: After reading the initial set of criteria I had this thought:

It would be nice to have the criteria in check-list form. That could make a  nice "cover sheet" for new repos until they write a proper README.

Author: Noted in proposal

> * We have an internal need, to make working on the project better—whether that's smoothing out processes, spinning up groups to keep work from being on one person, documenting information for worldwide efforts, etc

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* We have an internal need to make working on the project better. For example:
-   smoothing out processes 
-   spinning up groups to keep work from being on one person
-   documenting information for worldwide efforts
and other initiatives in this vein.
```
Suggestion to make it easier on the eyes.

> * We identify some utility we can offer our userbase that either directly or reasonably indirectly builds off of our core mission: to delivery high-quality template resources to people who need help making their own documentation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* We identify some utility to offer our userbase that either directly or reasonably indirectly builds off of our core mission: to deliver high-quality template resources to people who need help creating their own documentation.
```
<img width="447" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13576110/189150872-b871cf96-914a-4540-9517-0f72b0c4afe1.png">

Along with that, each new initiative needs someone to lead it. That person needs to be confident in leading (or co-leading) that initiative for at least a year. This is to prevent initiatives from being spun up and left to dwindle. (Unless said initiative isn't intended to last that long, of course. But we can expect some initiatives that intend to be short to take longer than initially planned.)

Finally, each initiative needs to articulate the deliverables it intends to produce in its first year. This can of course mutate over time, but an initial understanding is key to helping the rest of the project understand the new initiative.

With all of that, the initiative should be drafted as a RFC so the project steering committee can both ask insightful questions/provide comments, as flag their possible interest in helping with that initiative.

> 

Reviewer 5: Assuming the definition of "initiative" here is precisely "creating a new WG," this all looks logical. Just want to make sure there's a distinction between what's covered by this RFC and an "epic" (in release planning terms), which may be an ongoing goal that we never fully "complete," spans several releases, and is comprised on multiple tasks/issues.

I mention this because epics are a natural outcome of the backlog refinement process, and I don't think need an RFC or dedicated working group/leader.

Reviewer 3: +1 to @flicstar 's decision tree.

suggestion: (non-blocking): Riffing further off that, how are we going to do the early brainstorming for ideas?
* How can someone say "I reckon this is a good idea, another one else want to join me?"
* Would it be worth introducing some sort of light prioritized "backlog" of ideas, so we can say to someone "Cool, you want to work on a GeeWiz template. You should talk to Jo who was also interested in that."
* Maybe also use the backlog to record a suggestion which was rejected and why, so we can reference it when the suggestion comes through again.
* I note that a backlog can become long and unwieldy, and so probably should be implemented with a way to easily ignore old suggestions. Maybe use  an archived email list.

Author: Revised this to be about new initiatives that require working groups.

> Does this initiative naturally fit with our core project? Or is it a "sister" initiative?

For those that might be "sister" initiatives, we want to support those! And part of that support is being honest about if that initiative might be poorly supported as part of our project.

### The timing might not always be right for a given initiative

Keeping to the idea of focusing our efforts and providing deliverables to our userbase, sometimes we'll have a great idea that fits with the Good Docs Project mission that we aren't actually ready for. That could be because we need to process an intensive effort for a release, or we don't have the resources to sustain addressing a cause. Thus, part of this process is about being genuine and honest about what an initiative needs, and if we can provide for that initiative what it needs.

For example, the "Blog/Video" group has dropped videos from their working group for the time being, because the bandwidth to create videos doesn't exist. We may pick that up in 2023 or 2024, or decide the cost of supporting that is better spent on other initiatives.

## Consequences

> This could appear to make the project feel "bureaucratic" or "stuffy." While I feel that isn't the case, I understand some ways of implementing this idea could be alienating to passionate people. That's a conversation worth having.

Reviewer 4: We're growing as a project, and therefore we need some guidelines to bundle our efforts instead of dispersing into chaos.
I've seen that happening a few times :D  
I greatly appreciate the RFC!

## Feedback

{If you accept feedback from a community member, you will incorporate it into your RFC before it is accepted.
If you reject feedback, note that rejected feedback here before resolving the conversation.}

## Organizational dependencies

* Project & product management-type humans should weigh in heavily
* Working group leads and those who have thoughts on new initiative should review

## Implementation checklist

If this proposal is accepted, the following tasks must be completed:

- [ ] Actually write the process flow up
- [ ] Publish the flow somewhere (like in the KB referenced in RFC-012)
- [ ] Once that's all done, consider if any existing initiatives should be de-prioritized or otherwise re-evaluated

## Votes

Votes as per our [decision process](https://thegooddocsproject.dev/decisions/):

Project steering committee (listed alphabetically by first name):

- Aaron Peters:
- Alyssa Rock:
- Ankita Tripathi:
- Bryan Klein:
- Cameron Shorter:
- Carrie Crowe:
- Erin McKean:
- Deanna Thompson:
- Felicity Brand:
- Gayathri Krishnaswamy:
- Morgan Craft:
- Nelson Guya:
- Ryan Macklin:

> - Tina Lüdtke:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Tina Lüdtke: +1
```
